[Music]
as any current or past geometry student
knows the father of geometry was Euclid
a Greek mathematician who lived in
Alexandria Egypt around 300 BCE Euclid
is known as the author of a singularly
influential work known as elements you
think your math book is long Euclid's
elements as 13 volumes full of just
geometry in elements Euclid structured
and supplemented the work of many
mathematicians that came before him such
as Pythagoras Eudoxus Hippocrates and
others you can laid it all out as a
logical system of proof built up from a
set of definitions common notions and
his five famous postulates four of these
postulates are very simple and
straightforward
two points determine a line for example
the fifth one however is the seed that
grows our story
this fifth mysterious postulate is known
simply as the parallel postulate you see
unlike the first four the fifth
postulate is worded in a very convoluted
way
Euclid's version states that if a line
falls on two other lines so that the
measure of the two interior angles on
the same side of the transversal add up
to less than two right angles and then
the lines eventually intersect on that
side and therefore not parallel wow that
is a mouthful here's the simpler more
familiar version in a plane through any
point not on a given line only one new
line can be drawn that's parallel to the
original one many mathematicians over
the centuries tried to prove the
parallel postulate from the other floor
but were unable to do so in the process
they began looking at what would happen
logically if the fifth postulate were
actually not true some of the greatest
minds in the history of mathematics
asked this question people like even a
high thumb Omar Khayyam a Cyril Dino to
see Giovanni Sakaki
jános Bolyai Carl Gauss and Nikolay
Lobachevsky they all experimented with
negating the parallel postulate only to
discover that this gave rise to entire
alternative geometries these geometries
became collectively known as
non-euclidean geometries well we'll
leave the details of these different
geometries for another lesson
the main difference depends on the
curvature of the surface upon which the
lines are constructed turns out that
Euclid did not tell us the entire story
in elements he merely described one
possible way to look at the universe it
all depends on the context of what
you're looking at flat surfaces behave
one way while both positively and
negatively curved surfaces display very
different characteristics at first these
alternative geometry seemed
it's strange but were soon found to be
equally adept at describing the world
around us navigating our planet requires
elliptical geometry while much of the
art of MC escher displays hyperbolic
geometry Albert Einstein used non
Euclidean geometry as well to describe
the way that space-time becomes warped
in the presence of matter as part of his
general theory of relativity the big
mystery here is whether or not you could
add any inkling of the existence of
these different geometries when he wrote
his mysterious postulate we may never
know the answer to this question that
seems hard to believe that he had no
idea whatsoever of their nature being
the great intellect that he was and
understanding the field as thoroughly as
he did maybe he did know and
intentionally wrote the parallel
postulate in such a way as to lead
Kariya's minds after him to flesh out
the details if so he's probably quite
pleased these discoveries could never
have been made without gifted
progressive thinkers who were able to
suspend their preconceived notions and
think outside of what they've been
taught we too must all be willing at
times to put aside our preconceived
notions and physical experiences and
look at the larger picture or we risk
not seeing the rest of the story
you